This is not a law review article. This is a rant. 
This is a first person account of the weakening, sissifying, coddling of American kids as a result of a litigation explosion that wants to make everything so freaking safe that nothing can ever happen. Remember Finding Nemo? When the dad doesn’t want anything to happen to Nemo, and Dory says how could you want NOTHING to happen? Well, consider this article an expression of at least one Dory who asks the litigious world of safety-this and safety-that, are you happy with the changes you have wrought? Because I think you’ve taken it much too far.
Thanks to your over-zealous representation of injured people, you have cowed the public – from individual property owners to municipalities – into a fear of litigation that results in attempts to minimize liability by removing anything that might be fun, especially fun for kids.
Diving boards? Dangerous. Tall Swings? Dangerous. Merry-go-rounds that actually spin so fast you can go flying off into the sand if you let go? Dangerous. A backyard zipline that you actually have to hold on to, with your hands? Unspeakably dangerous.
If you are a parent or a grandparent, and you’ve taken your little ones to the park lately, you can see that these places are not what they used to be. And parents wouldn’t dare have one of those ziplines in the back yard – lest some visiting child break an arm and sue you. The worst thing about it, is that even if the parents of the kid with the broken arm are your friends, and they don’t want to sue you, their insurance company sure will. And there you have it. Take down the zip line. Take down the trampoline. For the city parks, same thing. Can’t expose the city coffers to lawsuits from every little Jack and Jill with a bruise or a broken bone. Get rid of the merry-go-round, put in some super-safe contraption that doesn’t move, and while we’re at it, put in some rubberized floor and make everything padded. So nothing can happen.

And nothing does. And the parks are boring and uneventful, and the parents and grandparents who take their kids often comment to each other – remember those merry-go-rounds we used to have? They wouldn’t allow that today. I remember going to the park next to my elementary school, where there were some super-tall swings. It was one of those bare metal frames, and the swings were just black rubber seats, suspended from long chains. Maybe the frame was 15 feet but to a kid it looked like a lot more. I remember swinging so high I would try to reach the branches of the giant tree nearby. I never could reach them. I remember swinging so high I thought the swing might go upside down and just go totally slack and dump me out. I remember that feeling in my belly of whoa that was high. I remember sometimes getting the guts to jump off the swing just as it reached the optimal height, and flying through the air to land in the sand. That was so much fun! Yeah, but that can not happen today. Those swings are too dangerous. Some kid could go flying through the air and just land in the sand! Unthinkable. He would sue for some kind of injury. Can’t have that. No city can afford to defend all those suits. Take them out and put in some fool-proof equipment.

Truly, so many times when I talk with anyone older than me, and get them to tell me a story about the most fun thing they ever did as a kid, as a teenager, in school, the answer I get will be a story of some kind of shenanigan, and as often as not, it ends with “that would never happen today”. Or I’ve seen my own teenagers react to stories of their grandfather’s adventures as a kid and say “that could never happen today.” I posit to you, dear reader, that this is not always a good thing. We learn from adventure, we learn from exposure to the unknown, to the thrill in the belly of going flying swinging jumping hanging holding our own weight, etc. Do you know that a lot kids today can’t even do a pullup? These kids have more access to nutrition than literally any other group of humans ever in all of history, and they are so weak they can’t even hold their own weight? Too coddled, too babied. When you went flying off the merry-go-round into the sand, you learned two things at least – one, you should hold on tighter, and two, you will be ok if you fall, so get back up there and try again. Oh, and three – that was fun! 

Brene Brown explains the concept of numbing behaviors – when people don’t want to feel uncomfortable feelings like anger or anxiety, they often resort to things like drinking, endless scrolling on their phones. These become numbing behaviors. Something people do to prevent themselves from confronting discomfort. But, she says, when you numb the uncomfortable feelings, you also numb the wonderful ones. Drink so much you can’t feel sadness? Ok great, but keep it up and soon you won’t be able to feel joy either. Premises liability is a numbing behavior too. When we make it so that everything is safe, so that there’s no chance of danger, or injury, of discomfort, we also make it so that everything is numb. There’s no chance of thrill, adventure, of that feeling in your belly when you swing so high that you think you might go all the way around in a giant loop. That feeling is one of life’s greatest teachers, and we have shut it down – we’ve litigated it out of our parks and public places.  

And what is the effect of that? Who knows, really, it’s hard to measure – but let’s imagine there was a way to calculate it. What would be the result of an entire generation of kids for whom thrill is foreign, who are weaker than their parents were, sheltered from so much risk of the little bumps and bruises of life? What happens when they reach adulthood? What happens when life gives them real problems? When they don’t have the storehouse of experiences in their bones, experiences which have taught them – it’s ok, get up and try again, just hold on tighter this time? 

A friend recently told me his school may have to shut down its sailing team. 
I put up a swing in my front yard, on a tree on the swale. It was one of those cargo-net-hoop swings, super safe, my kids had used it and sort of outgrown it, but it was still in very good condition so I just hung it up on a tree in front of my house. I would sit on it and talk on the phone, often in the evenings. During the day, I’d often see nannies stop and put toddlers on it. When our street hosted a neighborhood picnic, everyone enjoyed the swing.
But one day code enforcement drove by, and left me a warning. Can’t have a swing on a tree that’s on the swale. From my conversations with the good municipal servants responsible, I was able to gather that this is basically a liability job. What if someone falls off the swing and sues the city? And just like that, there goes the swing.

When did this begin? It seems there was a “litigation explosion” in the 1980s that is responsible for this super-safety-seeking insurance framework. Plaintiffs lawyers for some reason really got rolling, suing property owners for injuries incurred by visitors. Was it the reward-based punitive damage rules? Was it the large jury awards for damages based on pain and suffering? Why did plaintiffs begin to feel entitled to sue someone – the idea that, if I’ve been harmed, someone should pay? I’m old enough to remember what it was like to go to a summer camp that was run by teenagers. And I’m old enough to remember the effects of going to a park that had been “renovated” and made “safe” and thinking of it as being baby-fied – as in, made so safe that even a baby wouldn’t get hurt – and as a result, boring for regular kids who want to play and have fun.
I remember hearing phrases like “what if something happens” and it usually meant the end of something fun we used to do.  
Thankfully my parents did keep that zipline over the pool. And thankfully my dad was the director of a summer camp that, as he likes to say, was “run by teenagers”. We grew up with a healthy distrust of anyone over 19 who wanted to come in and tell us what was too dangerous, limiting us from finding out what we were really capable of. Could we make it to the end of the  scary 3-mile “nature trail”? Could we row across the bay? Could we beach the boats on an island? Could we flip kayaks over endlessly, over and over and over? King of the dock? Free swim meant chicken fights in the pool? I was lucky. 

What do I wish for now? I wish for a premises liability reform that would dial back a lot of this safety stuff. It should be possible, particularly since everyone has access to the emergency room, for premises to put up fun features, attractions like diving boards and swings, without worrying about unaffordable insurance rates. I’m not calling for wild-west chaos, but look at all these people doing crossfit, they challenge themselves all the time. But talk to anyone who’s visited Disney and the thing you always hear is “there are so many fat people”. And it’s no wonder. And premises are designed for the safe and fat, and premises designed for the safe and fat will only engender more safe and fat. I’m saying we need premises designed for the adventurous and fit. 

Last year I spent a week with family in California, on the outskirts of Yosemite National Park. We stayed at a place that is a ski-friendly condo in the winter, and hiking-friendly in the summer. Gorgeous views, lots of hikes nearby. And the treat? The real treat and highlight of the place? It turned out it was in walking distance to a lake. One side of the lake had a cliff-like face, where you could jump down ten feet or so into the water. Which was a thrill in and of itself. But then, on the cliff, there was a tall tree with -don’t tell anyone – a rope swing! Imagine, you grab this swing, and swing way out into the water, it was high, it was scary, and people would watch others try it, and then get up the guts to try it. I had to watch for a while before I got the courage to try it. It was thrilling!

It was adventurous and fun, and I was glad that I’m fit and strong enough to give it a go. The kids with our group mostly tried it too -some were too scared, but even then, they jumped off the cliff, which was also scary. It was the kind of thing that, really, no one should be scared of. Falling into water is generally safe. The swim back to the edge of the lake was only as far as you could launch yourself from the rope, so, not too far. At dinner after the trip to the rope swing, everyone was like on a high, exhilarated from the adventure, the release of energy and good feeling. I wish our daily lives had more of that. 

When we remove the possibility of thrill, fun, risk, we are left with only certainty, dullness, safety and the price is we don’t sharpen our skills, we don’t get stronger, we don’t get more courage. We are creating a nation of wimps. Is that really what we want? 

When our public spaces encourage more adventurous activity, courageous activity, people will want to partake in those activities. Don’t we want a nation of adventurers? A nation of strong, fit, gutsy, daring people? We can start small, start with loosening up premises liability, but by all means let’s start.